# 4 What are the challenges related to assessment in geography?


The preceding sections in this course have already alluded to some challenges related to assessment in geography, including differing definitions of progress and purposes of assessment; an accountability culture that focuses attention on AoL and piecemeal adoption of AfL techniques.

This section will focus on the challenges related to reliability and validity of assessments and to differentiation.


## 4.1 Assessment validity and reliability


When considering whether assessment is fair to all students, two issues are important: validity and reliability. Validity asks whether grades generated by a testing system represent a student’s achievement in the whole of geography. Can a series of timed, written tests at the end of a key stage assess all those things we think are important for students to learn about in school geography? Butt (n.d.) describes AoL as generating ‘high stakes’ results. By contrast, he describes teacher assessment outputs as ‘low stakes’. Teacher assessment is often seen as being of lower status than the results of tests even though it is more likely to be valid in these terms.

An over-reliance on test results may lead teachers to make generalisations and judgements about a student’s capability in all aspects of geography, based on the formal testing of a subset. For example, a grade ascribed on a short answer test says nothing about a student’s problem-solving or creative capacities in geography, nor about their ability to work in groups or engage in extended tasks. Perhaps all that can be said is that the tests simply tell us about the capabilities of students to answer questions at a particular time and of a particular type (and in the conditions and circumstances of the test) – no more and no less. 

Reliability asks whether a student’s performance changes (or not) depending on the particular questions that are set. Ideally, assessments should give every student an optimal opportunity to demonstrate what they know. In practice, however, tests have been found to be biased against students from particular backgrounds, socio-economic classes, ethnic groups or gender (Pullin, 1993; Cooper, 1998). Equity issues are particularly important when assessment results are used to label students or deny them access to courses or careers in the future. 

Research shows that working-class children:

… go into lower sets …

 … are set less challenging test items …

 … and therefore they have to answer more ‘realistic’ test items …

 … so they achieve lower test results than they deserve …

 … so they are confirmed as being appropriately placed in lower sets …

 … so they may experience a less rich curriculum, and will learn less content …

 … which restricts their opportunities to get high grades in examinations at the end of their schooling …

 … which restricts their career opportunities …

 … which means they and their family may be locked into a cycle of underachievement.

As you set assessments look for bias that might disadvantage different groups of students. Avoid setting a ceiling in terms of what students can achieve.


### Reflection point

Are tests used fairly? 




## 4.2 Differentiation


Differentiation is planning to ensure that all students in the class can understand and make progress in their learning. It includes tailoring assessment and feedback to the needs of individual students so that they can make progress and will help to address some of the concerns about reliability and validity of assessment.

Hattie (2012) identifies the following five characteristics of effective differentiation, all of which are relevant to assessment:

1. All students have the opportunity to explore the key concepts and achieve success.

2. Frequent formative assessment is used in order to monitor students’ progress.

3. Teachers are flexible about how they group students, giving them the opportunity to work alone, with different people or as a whole class.

4. Students are actively engaged in activities that will enable them to achieve success.

5. Differentiation is related to differential learning gains rather than focusing on attainment levels. Students who are making progress, regardless of their starting point, will need different opportunities from those who are not.

Planning assessment that offers all of these five characteristics is not easy and requires experience and knowledge of what works. However, that should not stop you working to achieve effective differentiation. Using AfL will enable you to find out who is or is not making progress so that you can use assessment to support the learning of all students.


### Activity 8 Recognising student diversity – inclusive assessment 
__Timing: Allow about 40 minutes__
<!--Heading:
            Part 1-->

#### Question

How could geographical assessments discriminate against working class students?

You might consider a range of learning and assessment activities, experiences outside school or access to resources.


#### Question

How can you effectively differentiate to avoid such discrimination?


#### Question


#### Discussion

There is a wide variety of possible discrimination. Some teachers will adopt a ‘deficit model’ in relation to the experiences, aspirations and abilities of working-class students. Such assumptions may affect the challenge and the type of assessments used. 

At the other end of the scale, some teachers are oblivious to potential barriers to learning related to the socio-economic situation of students. Limited access to resources and family support may disadvantage some students. 

The key to differentiating to avoid discrimination lies in getting to know the students. It is important not to label working-class students as a homogeneous group. 
<!--Heading:
            Part 2-->

#### Question

Read each of the short student profiles below. For each student, write notes about how you might recognise their specific needs related to AfL in geography lessons.

Ash has cerebral palsy, which causes difficulty with coordination. He also tires easily.


#### Question

Winston has Asperger’s syndrome. He is fascinated by studying different places but has communication difficulties and finds it difficult to be creative.


#### Question

Nina came to Britain with her parents following a war in her own country. Her parents have since divorced and Nina lives with her mother. She is experiencing emotional difficulties, which impact on her social relationships and her ability to concentrate.


#### Question


#### Discussion

You may have considered:

* adapting language, instructions and questions especially for Winston and Nina

* completing short assessments throughout a lesson, rather than leaving them until the end (Ash, Nina) 

* help from a scribe (Ash)

* ways of raising the students’ self-esteem (for example, setting achievable short-term goals)

* supporting the students with appropriate resources (for example, visual resources)

* supporting Nina in improving her social relationships (for peer assessment and group work).

Assessment of the physical environment would be crucial if you were working outside the classroom with Ash.
<!--Heading:
            Part 3-->

#### Question

What other factors might you consider when planning inclusive assessment? 

List a range of factors, explain their relevance and suggest effective responses.


#### Question


#### Discussion

A wide range of disabilities and special educational needs of students will affect their assessed work in many ways. Considering the needs of individual students, rather than labelling all students with a condition as being the same, is key to designing and implementing inclusive assessment. 

Some students have different preferred learning styles. The format of assessments may affect their performance and progress, so including a variety of assessment formats (perhaps giving students choices) will be more inclusive. 

Students with poor recall or poor attendance may be unable to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills if factual information is not provided. Including resources in assessments can help these students to exhibit skills such as analysis, evaluation and synthesis.




## 4.3 Summary


When planning for assessment for learning and assessment of learning, keep issues of validity, reliability and inclusivity in mind. Maintaining a focus on these will help you to integrate assessments that will inform your teaching and help students to make more progress.

